Our hello program begins life as a source program (or source ﬁle) that the programmer creates with an editor and saves in a text ﬁle called hello.c. The source program is a sequence of bits, each with a value of 0 or 1, organized in 8-bit chunks called bytes. Each byte represents some text character in the program. MostmodernsystemsrepresenttextcharactersusingtheASCIIstandardthat represents each character with a unique byte-sized integer value. For example, Figure 1.2 shows the ASCII representation of the hello.c program. The hello.c program is stored in a ﬁle as a sequence of bytes. Each byte has an integer value that corresponds to some character. For example, the ﬁrst byte has the integer value 35, which corresponds to the character ‘#’. The second byte hastheintegervalue105,whichcorrespondstothecharacter‘i’,andsoon.Notice that each text line is terminated by the invisible newline character ‘\n’, which is representedbytheintegervalue10.Filessuchas hello.c thatconsistexclusively of ASCII characters are known as text ﬁles. All other ﬁles are known as binary ﬁles. Therepresentationofhello.cillustratesafundamentalidea:Allinformation in a system—including disk ﬁles, programs stored in memory, user data stored in memory,anddatatransferredacrossanetwork—isrepresentedasabunchofbits. The only thing that distinguishes different data objects is the context in which we view them. For example, in different contexts, the same sequence of bytes might represent an integer, ﬂoating-point number, character string, or machine instruction. Asprogrammers,weneedtounderstandmachinerepresentationsofnumbers because they are not the same as integers and real numbers. They are ﬁnite approximations that can behave in unexpected ways. This fundamental idea is explored in detail in Chapter 2.
