2.5.1. Integers

2.5.2. Floating-Point Numbers

2.5.3. Strings

2.5.3.1 Double Quotes

2.5.3.2 Single Quotes

通过反斜杠进行转移
```php
'Today\'s the day'

```

2.5.3.3 Here-Docs
enable you to embed large pieces of text in your scripts, 
which may include lots of double quotes and single quotes, 
without having to constantly escape them.
单引号 双引号不需要转义

```php
<<<THE_END
PHP stands for "PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor".
The acronym "PHP" is therefore, usually referred to as a recursive acronym because the
 long form contains the acronym itself.
As this text is being written in a here-doc there is no need to escape the double quotes.
THE_END
```

2.5.3.4 Accessing String Offsets
```php
$str = "abcdefg"; echo $str[0]; echo $str[2]; echo $str{0};
```
建议用{}访问字符串增加可读
Note
In PHP 4, you could use [] (square brackets) to access string offsets. 
This support still exists in PHP 5, and you are likely to bump into it often. 
However, you should really use the {} notation because it differentiates string offsets from array offsets and thus, 
makes your code more readable.

2.5.4. Booleans

2.5.6. Resources
Resources, a special data type, represent a PHP extension resource such as a database query, an open file, a database connection, and lots of other external types.

You will never directly touch variables of this type, but will pass them around to the relevant functions that know how to interact with the specified resource.


2.5.7.9 each()
The each() function returns the current key/value pair and advances the internal pointer to the next element. 
When it reaches the end of of the array, it returns a booloean value of false. 
The key/value pair is returned as an array with four elements: the elements 0 and "key",
which have the value of the key, and elements 1 and "value", 
which have the value of the value. The reason for duplication is that, if you're accessing these elements individually
each 返回当前数组指针指向的key和value
 
 2.5.7.10 list()
The list() construct is a way of assigning multiple array offsets to multiple variables in one statement:
把索引数组中的值赋值给 list中的每个变量

 2.5.7.11 Additional Methods for Traversing Arrays
You can use other functions to iterate over arrays including current() and next(). You shouldn't use them because they are confusing and are legacy functions. 
这是遗留下来的方法 有困惑 尽量不要用

2.5.8. Constants

```php
define("CONSTANT_NAME", value [, case_sensitivity])

```
2.6.9. The Cast Operators
类型转换
```php
(int)
(float)
(string)
(array)
(object)
```


2.6.11. The One and Only Ternary Operator

truth_expr ? expr1 : expr2









