3.20. Class Type Hints in Function Parameters
 
allow you (if you wish) to specify the class you are expecting in your function's or method's parameters.
可以声明指定的类

Here's the code of a typical PHP function, which accepts one function parameter and first checks if it belongs to the class it requires:
检查对象是否属于某个类

```php
function onlyWantMyClassObjects($obj)
{
    if (!($obj instanceof MyClass)) {
        die("Only objects of type MyClass can be sent to this function");
    }
    ...
}
```
Writing code that verifies the object's type in each relevant function can be a lot of work. 
上面的代码很繁琐
To save you time, PHP enables you to specify the class of the parameter in front of the parameter itself.
可以声明对象的类在对象前

Following is the same example using class type hints:
```php
function onlyWantMyClassObjects(MyClass $obj)
{
    // ...
}
```
When the function is called, 
PHP automatically performs an instanceof check before the function's code starts executing.
自动检查对象是不是属于某个类
If it fails, it will abort with an error. 
Because the check is an instanceof check, 
it is legal to send any object that satisfies the is-a relationship with the class type. 
这种检查的方式就是instanceof的检查
This feature is mainly useful during development, 
because it helps ensure that you aren't passing objects to functions which weren't designed to handle them.
用来检查传递的对象是否正确


3.21. Summary
This chapter covered the PHP 5 object model, 
including the concept of classes and objects,
类和对象的概念
polymorphism,
多态
and other important object-oriented concepts and semantics.
面向对象的概念和语法
If you're new to PHP but have written code in object-oriented languages,
you will probably not understand how people managed to write object-oriented code until now.
If you've written object-oriented code in PHP 4, you were probably just dying for these new features.

 








