4.2 Overloading Capabilities
In PHP 5, extensions written in C can overload almost every aspect of the object syntax. 
It also allows PHP code to overload a limited subset that is most often needed. 
This section covers the overloading abilities that you can control from your PHP code.
用c写的扩展可以重载几乎所有对象的语法
使用php也能重载


4.2.1. Property and Method Overloading
属性和方法的重载
PHP allows overloading of property access and method calls by implementing special proxy methods that are invoked if the relevant property or method doesn't exist. 
php允许调用不存在的对象和方法

This gives you a lot of flexibility in intercepting these actions and defining your own functionality.
可以灵活定义

通过实现下面的方法
You may implement the following method prototypes:

function __get($property)
function __set($property, $value)
function __call($method, $args)



__get is passed the property's name, and you should return a value.
通过传递变量的名字，返回一个值

__set is passed the property's name and its new value.
传递变量的名字和新的值

__call is passed the method's name and a numerically indexed array of the passed arguments starting from 0 for the first argument.
传递方法的名字

The following example shows how to use the __set and __get functions (array_key_exists() is covered later in this book; it checks whether a key exists in the specified array):
通过对象中原先定义好的数组，给未定义的变量赋值和取值
```php
class StrictCoordinateClass {
    private $arr = array('x' => NULL, 'y' => NULL);

    function __get($property)
    {
        if (array_key_exists($property, $this->arr)) {
            return $this->arr[$property];
        } else {
            print "Error: Can't read a property other than x & y\n";
        }
    }

    function __set($property, $value)
    {
        if (array_key_exists($property, $this->arr)) {
            $this->arr[$property] = $value;
        } else {
            print "Error: Can't write a property other than x & y\n";
        }
    }
}

$obj = new StrictCoordinateClass();

$obj->x = 1;
print $obj->x;

print "\n";

$obj->n = 2;
print $obj->n;
```


The output is
1
Error: Can't write a property other than x & y
Error: Can't read a property other than x & y



As x exists in the object's array, 
the setter and getter method handlers agrees to read/write the values. 
However, when accessing the property n, both for reading and writing, array_key_exists() returns false and, therefore, 
the error messages are reached.
如果已存在就返回，没存在就赋值，如果没存在又没赋值就返回默认值


__call() can be used for a variety of purposes. 
The following example shows how to create a delegation model, 
in which an instance of the class HelloWorldDelegator delegates all method calls to an instance of the HelloWorld class:

```php
class HelloWorld {
    function display($count)
    {
        for ($i = 0; $i < $count; $i++) {
            print "Hello, World\n";
        }
        return $count;
    }
}

class HelloWorldDelegator {
    function __construct()
    {
        $this->obj = new HelloWorld();
    }

    function __call($method, $args)
    {
        return call_user_func_array(array($this->obj , $method), $args);
    }

    private $obj;
}

$obj = new HelloWorldDelegator();
print $obj->display(3);
```


This script's output is
Hello, World
Hello, World
Hello, World
3



The call_user_func_array() function allows __call() to relay the function call with its arguments to HelloWorld::display() which prints out "Hello, World\n" three times.
由于display不存在，调用了__call魔术方法
It then returns $count (in this case, 3) which is then printed out. 
Not only can you relay the method call to a different object (or handle it in whatever way you want), 
but you can also return a value from __call(), just like a regular method.
可以返回对象和值




