5.7. Sessions
A PHP session allows an application to store information for the current "session," 
which can be defined as one user being logged in to your application. 
A session is identified by a unique session ID. 
session由唯一的session id 定义
PHP creates a session ID that is an MD5 hash of the remote IP address, the current time, and some extra randomness represented in a hexadecimal string.
由ip 时间 随机数生成session Id
This session ID can be passed in a cookie or added to all URLs to navigate your application.
session可以由cookie传入或者通过url传递 
For security reasons, 
从安全角度
it's better to force the user to have cookies enabled than to pass the session ID on the URL 
用户使用cookies传sessionId 比url更好
(which normally can be done manually by adding ?PHP_SESSID=<session_id>, 
or by turning on session.use_trans_sid in php.ini) 
where it might end up in web server's logs as a HTTP_REFERER or be found by some evil person monitoring your traffic.
url传递可能被服务器日志或者监控日志记录
That evil person can still see the session cookie data, of course, 
so you might want to use an SSL-enabled server to be really safe. 
But, to continue discussing sessions, we're going to rewrite the previous cookie example using sessions. 
We create a file called session.inc that sets some session values, as shown in the following example, 
and include this file at the beginning of any script that is part of the session:

```php
<?php
    ini_set('session.use_cookies', 1);
    ini_set('session.use_only_cookies', 1);
    session_start();
?>
```
On the first line, the configuration parameter 'session.use_cookies' is set to 1, 
which means that cookies will be used for propagation of the session ID. 

On the second line, 'session.use_only_cookies' is set to 1, 
which means that a session ID passed in the URL to the script will be discarded. 
禁止使用url传递session
The second setting requires that users have cookies enabled to use sessions. 

If you cannot rely on people having cookies enabled, you can either remove this line, 
or you can change the value to 0, 
which ensures that there is no global setting for this configuration parameter in php.ini or another place.

You can configure the place where PHP will store session files with the session.save_path configuration setting.
可以通过修改session.save_path 改变session的存储地址





