1.7.3
Virtual Memory

Virtual memory is an abstraction that provides each process with the illusion that 

it has exclusive use of the main memory. 

Each process has the same uniform view of memory, 

which is known as its virtual address space. 

The virtual address space for Linux processes is shown in Figure 1.13. 

(Other Unix systems use a similar layout.)

In Linux, the topmost region of the address space is reserved for code and
 
data in the operating system that is common to all processes. 

The lower region of the address space holds the code and data defined by the user’s process. 

Note that addresses in the figure increase from the bottom to the top.

The virtual address space seen by each process consists of a number of well defined areas,

each with a specific purpose. 

You will learn more about these areas later in the book, 

but it will be helpful to look briefly at each, 

starting with the lowest addresses and working our way up:

- Program code and data.
Code begins at the same fixed address for all processes,
followed by data locations that correspond to global C variables. 
The code and data areas are initialized directly from the contents of an executable object file,
in our case the hello executable. 
You will learn more about this part of the address space when we study linking and loading in Chapter 7.

- Heap.
The code and data areas are followed immediately by the run-time heap.
Unlike the code and data areas, 
which are fixed in size once the process begins running, 
the heap expands and contracts dynamically at run time as 
a result of calls to C standard library routines such as malloc and free.
We will study heaps in detail when we learn about managing virtual memory in Chapter 9.

- Shared libraries. 
Near the middle of the address space is an area that holds the code and data 
for shared libraries such as the C standard library and the math library. 
The notion of a shared library is a powerful but somewhat difficult concept. 
You will learn how they work when we study dynamic linking in Chapter 7.

- Stack. 
At the top of the user’s virtual address space is the user stack that the compiler uses to implement function calls. 
Like the heap, the user stack expands and contracts dynamically during the execution of the program. 
In particular, each time we call a function, the stack grows. 
Each time we return from a function, it contracts. 
You will learn how the compiler uses the stack in Chapter 3.

- Kernel virtual memory. 
The kernel is the part of the operating system that is always resident in memory. 
The top region of the address space is reserved for the kernel. 
Application programs are not allowed to read or write the contents of this area or to directly call functions defined in the kernel code.

For virtual memory to work, 

a sophisticated interaction is required between the hardware and the operating system software, 
including a hardware translation of every address generated by the processor. 

The basic idea is to store the contents of a process’s virtual memory on disk, 

and then use the main memory as a cache for the disk. 

Chapter 9 explains how this works and why it is so important to the operation of modern systems.


