###4.4. Design Patterns

Also, we highly recommend reading the classic book Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John M. Vlissides.
推荐书籍

So, what exactly qualifies a language as being object oriented (OO)?
如何定义一个语言是面向对象的语言呢

Some people believe that any language that has objects that encapsulate data and methods can be considered OO. 
有人认为有对象实例包含数据和方法可以称为面向对象

Others would also include polymorphism via inheritance and access modifiers into the definition. 
The purists would probably list dozens of pages of things they think an OO language must support, 
such as exceptions, method overloading, reflection, strict typing, and more. 
You can bet that none of these people would ever agree with each other because of the diversity of OOP languages, 
each of them good for certain tasks and not quite as good for others.
有人认为多态，继承，异常，方法重载，强类型的才叫面向对象


However, what most people would agree with is that developing OO software is not only about the syntax and the language features 
but it is a state of mind. 
Although there are some professionally written programs in functional languages such as C (for example, PHP)
, people developing in OO languages tend to give the software design more of an emphasis.
One reason might be the fact that OO languages tend to contain features that help in the design phase, 
but the main reason is probably cultural because the OO community has always put a lot of emphasis on good design.
可以使用设计模式的更常定义为面向对象

This chapter covers some of the more advanced OO techniques that are possible with PHP, 
including the implementation of some common design patterns that are easily adapted to PHP.

When designing software, certain programming patterns repeat themselves. 
Some of these have been addressed by the software design community and have been given accepted general solutions. 
These repeating problems are called design patterns. 
The advantage of knowing and using these patterns is not only to save time instead of reinventing the wheel, 
but also to give developers a common language in software design. 
使用设计模式避免重造轮子
You'll often hear software developers say, "Let's use a singleton pattern for this," or "Let's use a factory pattern for that." 
Due to the importance of these patterns in today's software development, this section covers some of these patterns.
更好的与别人沟通


###4.4.1. Strategy Pattern 


策略模式
The strategy pattern is typically used when your programmer's algorithm should be interchangeable with different variations of the algorithm. 
For example, if you have code that creates an image, under certain circumstances, 
you might want to create JPEGs and under other circumstances, you might want to create GIF files.

The strategy pattern is usually implemented by declaring an abstract base class with an algorithm method,
策略模式常常继承抽象类,实现相应的方法
which is then implemented by inheriting concrete classes. 
At some point in the code, it is decided what concrete strategy is relevant; 
it would then be instantiated and used wherever relevant.


The strategy pattern is often used with the factory pattern, which is described later in this section. The factory pattern selects the correct strategy.
策略模式通常和工厂模式一起使用,工厂模式选择正确的策略

```php
abstract class FileNamingStrategy {
    abstract function createLinkName($filename);
}

class ZipFileNamingStrategy extends FileNamingStrategy {
    function createLinkName($filename)
    {
        return "http://downloads.foo.bar/$filename.zip";
    }
}

class TarGzFileNamingStrategy extends FileNamingStrategy {
    function createLinkName($filename)
    {
        return "http://downloads.foo.bar/$filename.tar.gz";
    }
}

if (strstr($_SERVER["HTTP_USER_AGENT"], "Win")) {
    $fileNamingObj = new ZipFileNamingStrategy();
} else {
    $fileNamingObj = new TarGzFileNamingStrategy();
}

$calc_filename = $fileNamingObj->createLinkName("Calc101");
$stat_filename = $fileNamingObj->createLinkName("Stat2000");
```

###4.4.2. Singleton Pattern
The singleton pattern is probably one of the best-known design patterns. 
单例模式是最常见的设计模式
You have probably encountered遇到 many situations where you have an object that handles some centralized集中 operation in your application, 
需要一个集中操作的对象，不用每次都实例化
such as a logger object. In such cases, 
it is usually preferred for only one such application-wide instance to exist and for all application code to have the ability to access it.
只有一个实例在应用里访问
Specifically, in a logger object, you would want every place in the application that wants to print something to the log to have access to it, 
and let the centralized logging mechanism handle the filtering of log messages according to log level settings. 
For this kind of situation, the singleton pattern exists.

Making your class a singleton class is usually done by implementing a static class method getInstance(),
which returns the only single instance of the class.
单例模式的类一般使用静态方法 getInstance();用来返回类的实例
The first time you call this method, it creates an instance, 
saves it in a private static variable, 
and returns you the instance. 
访问这个静态方法，创建一个实例，保存到私有静态变量中
The subsequent随后 times, 
it just returns you a handle to the already created instance.
返回已经创建好的实例

The essence of this pattern is Logger::getInstance(),
which gives you access to the logging object from anywhere in your application, 
whether it is from a function, a method, or the global scope.
无论从方法还是全局访问，都会返回相同的

In this example, the constructor and clone methods are defined as private.
初始化和克隆的方法定义为私有方法
This is done so that a developer can't mistakenly create a second instance of the Logger class using the new or clone operators;
使无法通过new和克隆来创建新的对象
therefore, getInstance() is the only way to access the singleton class instance.
getInstance是唯一能访问这个实例的方法

Here's an example:
```php
class Logger {
    static function getInstance()
    {
        if (self::$instance == NULL) {
            self::$instance = new Logger();
        }
        return self::$instance;
    }
    
    //把构造函数声明为 protected，防止用 `new` 操作符在这个类之外创建新的实例
    private function __construct()
    {
    }

    //设置为私有方法，防止进行克隆
    private function __clone()
    {

    }

    function Log($str)
    {
        // Take care of logging
    }

    static private $instance = NULL;
}

Logger::getInstance()->Log("Checkpoint");
```

###4.4.3. Factory Pattern
Polymorphism and the use of base class is really the center of OOP.
多态和基类的使用是面向对象的核心
However, at some stage舞台,
a concrete instance of the base class's subclasses must be created.
This is usually done using the factory pattern.
创建基类的子类的实例，就需要用到工厂模式，类似容器(容器是为了解决依赖注入，还是有区别的)

A Factory class has a static method that receives some input and, according to that input,
it decides what class instance to create (usually a subclass).
工厂类通过静态方法，来接收参数，根据输入，决定哪个子类实现实例化

Say that on your web site,
different kinds of users can log in. 
Some are guests, some are regular customers, and others are administrators. 
In a common scenario, you would have a base class User and have three subclasses: GuestUser, CustomerUser, and AdminUser. 
Likely User and its subclasses would contain methods to retrieve information about the user 
(for example, permissions on what they can access on the web site and their personal preferences).

The best way for you to write your web application is to use the base class User as much as possible, 
so that the code would be generic and that it would be easy to add additional kinds of users when the need arises.

The following example shows a possible implementation for the four User classes, 
and the UserFactory class that is used to create the correct user object according to the username:
根据用户名，实例化不同的子类

This code snippet is a classic example of a factory pattern. 
You have a class hierarchy (in this case, the User hierarchy), 
which your code such as displayPermissions() treats identically. 
The only place where treatment of the classes differ is in the factory itself, 
which constructs these instances. 
In this example, the factory checks what kind of user the username belongs to and creates its class accordingly. 
In real life, instead of saving the user to user-kind mapping in a static array, 
you would probably save it in a database or a configuration file.

Besides Create(), you will often find other names used for the factory method, 
such as factory(), factoryMethod(), or createInstance().
通过作为工厂模式的命令

```php
abstract class User {
    function __construct($name)
    {
        $this->name = $name;
    }

    function getName()
    {
        return $this->name;
    }

    // Permission methods
    function hasReadPermission()
    {
        return true;
    }

    function hasModifyPermission()
    {
        return false;
    }

    function hasDeletePermission()
    {
        return false;
    }

    // Customization methods
    function wantsFlashInterface()
    {
        return true;
    }

    protected $name = NULL;
}

class GuestUser extends User {
}

class CustomerUser extends User {
   function hasModifyPermission()
    {
        return true;
    }
}

class AdminUser extends User {
   function hasModifyPermission()
    {
        return true;
    }

    function hasDeletePermission()
    {
        return true;
    }

    function wantsFlashInterface()
    {
        return false;
    }
}

class UserFactory {
    private static $users = array("Andi"=>"admin", "Stig"=>"guest",
                           "Derick"=>"customer");

    static function Create($name)
    {
        if (!isset(self::$users[$name])) {
            // Error out because the user doesn't exist
        }
        switch (self::$users[$name]) {
            case "guest": return new GuestUser($name);
            case "customer": return new CustomerUser($name);
            case "admin": return new AdminUser($name);
            default: // Error out because the user kind doesn't exist
        }
    }
}

function boolToStr($b)
{
    if ($b == true) {
        return "Yes\n";
    } else {
        return "No\n";
    }
}

function displayPermissions(User $obj)
{
    print $obj->getName() . "'s permissions:\n";
    print "Read: " . boolToStr($obj->hasReadPermission());
    print "Modify: " . boolToStr($obj->hasModifyPermission());
    print "Delete: " . boolToStr($obj->hasDeletePermission());

}

function displayRequirements(User $obj)
{
    if ($obj->wantsFlashInterface()) {
        print $obj->getName() . " requires Flash\n";
    }
}

$logins = array("Andi", "Stig", "Derick");

foreach($logins as $login) {
    displayPermissions(UserFactory::Create($login));
    displayRequirements(UserFactory::Create($login));
}
```

Running this code outputs
Andi's permissions:
Read: Yes
Modify: Yes
Delete: Yes
Stig's permissions:
Read: Yes
Modify: No
Delete: No
Stig requires Flash
Derick's permissions:
Read: Yes
Modify: Yes
Delete: No
Derick requires Flash


### 4.4.4. Observer Pattern
观察者设计模式
PHP applications, usually manipulate操作 data. 
In many cases, changes to one piece of data can affect many different parts of your application's code. 
改变一个数据会影响别的不同位置的代码
For example, the price of each product item displayed on an e-commerce site in the customer's local currency is affected by the current exchange rate. 
Now, assume that each product item is represented by a PHP object that most likely originates from a database; 
the exchange rate itself is most probably being taken from a different source and is not part of the item's database entry. 
Let's also assume that each such object has a display() method that outputs the HTML relevant to this product.

The observer pattern allows for objects to register on certain events and/or data, 
and when such an event or change in data occurs, 
it is automatically notified. 
通过集中注册事件和数据，使得数据改变时可以自动通知
In this way, you could develop the product item to be an observer on the currency exchange rate, 
and before printing out the list of items, 
you could trigger an event that updates all the registered objects with the correct rate. 
Doing so gives the objects a chance to update themselves and take the new data into account in their display() method.

Usually, the observer pattern is implemented using an interface called Observer, which the class that is interested in acting as an observer must implement.
观察者模式通常实现了Observer接口

For example:
An object that wants to be "observable" usually has a register method that allows the Observer object to register itself. 
先把数据往维护的数组里注册，在发生改变时，通知每个注册的对象


Although the example isn't complete (the ProductItem class doesn't do anything useful), 
when the last line executes (the setExchangeRate() method), 
both $product1 and $product2 are notified via their notify() methods with the new exchange rate value, 
allowing them to recalculate their cost.
当发生改变时，商品1和商品2接收到通知，然后重新计算价格

This pattern can be used in many cases; specifically in web development,
it can be used to create an infrastructure基础结构 of objects representing data that might be affected by cookies, GET, POST, and other input variables.


For example, the following might be our exchange rate class:

```php

interface Observer {
    function notify($obj);
}
class ExchangeRate {
    static private $instance = NULL;
    private $observers = array();
    private $exchange_rate;

    private function ExchangeRate() {
    }

    static public function getInstance() {
        if (self::$instance == NULL) {
            self::$instance = new ExchangeRate();
        }
        return self::$instance;
    }

    public function getExchangeRate() {
        return $this->$exchange_rate;
    }

    public function setExchangeRate($new_rate) {
        $this->$exchange_rate = $new_rate;
        $this->notifyObservers();
    }

    public function registerObserver($obj) {
        $this->observers[] = $obj;
    }

    function notifyObservers() {
        foreach($this->observers as $obj) {
            $obj->notify($this);
        }
    }
}

class ProductItem implements Observer {
    public function __construct() {
        ExchangeRate::getInstance()->registerObserver($this);
    }

    public function notify($obj) {
        if ($obj instanceof ExchangeRate) {
             // Update exchange rate data
             print "Received update!\n";
        }
   }
}

$product1 = new ProductItem();
$product2 = new ProductItem();

ExchangeRate::getInstance()->setExchangeRate(4.5);
```

This code prints
Received update!
Received update!










 
