标签操作
 
:tabnew mytab 新建一个标签mytab
:tabn 跳到下一个标签
:tabp 跳到上一个标签
用gt或gT在普通模式下跳转到下一个和上一个标签
 
切割窗口操作
split + filename
 
:split 水平方向切割一个窗口
:vsplit 竖直方向切割一个窗口
用Ctrl-w+方向键 在各个切割窗口之间切换。
 
vimtutor vim game
 
 
 
d$ delete to the end of line
d0 delete to the start of line
 
245     w - until the start of the next word, EXCLUDING its first character.
246     e - to the end of the current word, INCLUDING the last character.
247     $ - to the end of the line, INCLUDING the last character.
 
替换
r+需要替换的单词
 
 修改
 Type  ce  to change from the cursor to the end ofthe word, 
 c$  to change to the end of a line.
 
 
485   ** Type CTRL-G to show your location in the file and the file status.
486      Type  G  to move to a line in the file. **
 
全局替换
%s/type/new/g  
 
 
554         ** Type  :s/old/new/g  to substitute 'new' for 'old'. **
555 
556   1. Move the cursor to the line below marked --->.
557 
558   2. Type  :s/thee/the <ENTER> .  Note that this command only changes the
559      first occurrence of "thee" in the line.
560 
561   3. Now type  :s/thee/the/g .  Adding the  g  flag means to substitute
562      globally in the line, change all occurrences of "thee" in the line.
563 
564 ---> thee best time to see thee flowers is in thee spring.
565 
566   4. To change every occurrence of a character string between two lines,
567      type   :#,#s/old/new/g    where #,# are the line numbers of the range
568                                of lines where the substitution is to be done.
569      Type   :%s/old/new/g      to change every occurrence in the whole file.
570      Type   :%s/old/new/gc     to find every occurrence in the whole file,
571                                with a prompt whether to substitute or not.
 
 
  ** Type  :!  followed by an external command to execute that command. **
  
  
  
 
   ** To save part of the file, type  v  motion  :w FILENAME **
647 
648   1. Move the cursor to this line.
649 
650   2. Press  v  and move the cursor to the fifth item below.  Notice that the
651      text is highlighted.
652 
653   3. Press the  :  character.  At the bottom of the screen  :'<,'> will appear.
654 
655   4. Type  w TEST  , where TEST is a filename that does not exist yet.  Verify
656      that you see  :'<,'>w TEST  before you press <ENTER>.
657 
658   5. Vim will write the selected lines to the file TEST.  Use  :!dir  or  :!ls
659      to see it.  Do not remove it yet!  We will use it in the next lesson.
660 
661 NOTE:  Pressing  v  starts Visual selection.  You can move the cursor around
662        to make the selection bigger or smaller.  Then you can use an operator
663        to do something with the text.  For example,  d  deletes the text.
 
 
 
 
676   2. Now retrieve your TEST file using the command   :r TEST   where TEST is
677      the name of the file you used.
678      The file you retrieve is placed below the cursor line.
679 
680   3. To verify that a file was retrieved, cursor back and notice that there
681      are now two copies of Lesson 5.3, the original and the file version.
682 
683 NOTE:  You can also read the output of an external command.  For example,
684        :r !ls  reads the output of the ls command and puts it below the
685        cursor.
 
 
NOTE:  a, i and A all go to the same Insert mode, the only difference is where
756        the characters are inserted.
 
 
 Use  e  to move to the next incomplete worde and repeat steps 3 and 4.
 
 
r 单个替换 R 一直替换下去
 
 
841   6. Typing ":set xxx" sets the option "xxx".  Some options are:
842         'ic' 'ignorecase'       ignore upper/lower case when searching
843         'is' 'incsearch'        show partial matches for a search phrase
844         'hls' 'hlsearch'        highlight all matching phrases 
845      You can either use the long or the short option name.
 
 