算法单词出处
So the notion of an algorithm – and this is just a fancy computer science term for an approach to something – actually comes from – anywhere know where the word algorithm comes from? Nineteenth century Persian mathematician named, if I can pronounce it right, Al-Khwarizmi. Al-Khwarizmi, which sounds like algorithm. There you go.

驼峰和下划线命名
all the words or methods that we define are all case sensitive. You'll notice that sometimes we use a naming convention. I'm actually bad because I mixed up the naming convention a little bit where the first name of the methods, we can either have a lower-case character or an upper-case character, it's up to you how you want to do it. Just be consistent.
Sometimes, this notation is referred to as camel case, and the reason why it's referred to as camel case, the first letter of every word that actually appears sort of all stuck together is upper cased, and it's kind of like a camel with humps, because every once in a while you get this capital letter with a hump. So that when you – if you hear someone refer to oh, we use capital case or camel case notation, that's what they mean. It's all strung together as one word with the first letter of each word capitalized.
Sometimes what people will do is they'll actually put in underscores. You can put in underscores between words and that's perfectly fine, too. When we get into Java, I'll actually spent probably like half of a lecture talking about the different conventions for all kinds of things, because when we get into the Java world there's actually a bunch of things besides just method names you need to worry about, and we use all different sorts of conventions for them.
For right now, I'd just say pick one convention and stick with it, and the convention you can use is, you know, the two most common ones are either camel case all the way through or camel case except for the first character, which is lower case. 

面向过程和面向对象
there's a difference between procedural and object-orient