shift Operations in C

C also provides a set of shift operations for shifting bit patterns to the left and to the right. 

That is, x is shifted k bits to the left, 
dropping off the k most significant bits and filling the right end with k zeros. 

The shift amount should be a value between 0 and n − 1. 

Shift operations associate from left to right, so x << j << k is equivalent to (x << j) << k.

There is a corresponding right shift operation x >> k, 
but it has a slightly subtle behavior. 

Generally, machines support two forms of right shift: logical and arithmetic. 

A logical right shift fills the left end with k zeros, 

An arithmetic right shift fills the left end with k repetitions of the most significant bit

This convention might seem peculiar, 
but as we will see it is useful for operating on signed integer data.

As examples, the following table shows the effect of applying the different
shift operations to some sample 8-bit data:

The italicized digits indicate the values that fill the right (left shift) or left (right
shift) ends. 

Observe that all but one entry involves filling with zeros. 

The exception is the case of shifting [10010101] right arithmetically. 

Since its most significant bit is 1, 

this will be used as the fill value.

The C standards do not precisely define which type of right shift should be used. 

For unsigned data (i.e., integral objects declared with the qualifier unsigned), 

right shifts must be logical. 

For signed data (the default), 
either arithmetic or logical shifts may be used. 

This unfortunately means that any code assuming one form or the other will potentially encounter portability problems.

In practice, however, almost all compiler/machine combinations use arithmetic right shifts for signed data, 

and many programmers assume this to be the case.

Java, on the other hand, has a precise definition of how right shifts should be performed. 

The expression x >> k shifts x arithmetically by k positions, while x >>> k shifts it logically.