2.1.3
Data Sizes

Computers and compilers support multiple data formats using different ways to encode data, 
such as integers and floating point, as well as different lengths. 

For example, many machines have instructions for manipulating single bytes, 

as well as integers represented as 2-, 4-, and 8-byte quantities. 

They also support floating- point numbers represented as 4- and 8-byte quantities.

The C language supports multiple data formats for both integer and floating-point data. 

The C data type char represents a single byte. 

Although the name “char” derives from the fact that it is used to store a single character in a text string, 

it can also be used to store integer values. 

The C data type int can also be prefixed by the qualifiers short, long, and recently long long, providing integer
representations of various sizes. 

Figure 2.3 shows the number of bytes allocated for different C data types. 

The exact number depends on both the machine and the compiler. 

We show typical sizes for 32-bit and 64-bit machines. 

Observe that “short” integers have 2-byte allocations, 
while an unqualified int is 4 bytes. 

A “long” integer uses the full word size of the machine. 

The “long long” integer data type, introduced in ISO C99, allows the full range of 64-bit integers. 

For 32-bit machines, 
the compiler must compile operations for this data type by generating code that performs sequences of 32-bit operations.

Figure 2.3 also shows that a pointer (e.g., a variable declared as being of type “char *”) uses the full word size of the machine. 

Most machines also support two different floating-point formats: 
single precision, 
declared in C as float,
and double precision, 
declared in C as double. 

These formats use 4 and 8 bytes, respectively.

```C
New to C?
Declaring pointers
For any data type T , the declaration
T *p;
indicates that p is a pointer variable, pointing to an object of type T . For example,
char *p;
is the declaration of a pointer to an object of type char.
```

Programmers should strive to make their programs portable across different machines and compilers. 

One aspect of portability is to make the program insensitive to the exact sizes of the different data types. 

The C standards set lower bounds on the numeric ranges of the different data types, 

as will be covered later, but there are no upper bounds. Since 32-bit machines have been the standard since around
1980, many programs have been written assuming the allocations listed for this
word size in Figure 2.3. Given the increasing availability of 64-bit machines, many
hidden word size dependencies will show up as bugs in migrating these programs
to new machines. For example, many programmers assume that a program object
declared as type int can be used to store a pointer. This works fine for most 32-bit
machines but leads to problems on a 64-bit machine.