2.2.1
Integral Data Types

C supports a variety of integral data types—ones that represent finite ranges of integers. 

These are shown in Figures 2.8 and 2.9, along with the ranges of values
they can have for “typical” 32- and 64-bit machines. 

Each type can specify a size
with keyword char, short, long, or long long, as well as an indication of whether
the represented numbers are all nonnegative (declared as unsigned), or possibly negative (the default). 

As we saw in Figure 2.3, the number of bytes allocated for
the different sizes vary according to machine’s word size and the compiler. 

Based on the byte allocations, the different sizes allow different ranges of values to be represented. 

The only machine-dependent range indicated is for size designator
long. 

Most 64-bit machines use an 8-byte representation, giving a much wider
range of values than the 4-byte representation used on 32-bit machines.

One important feature to note in Figures 2.8 and 2.9 is that the ranges are not
symmetric—the range of negative numbers extends one further than the range of
positive numbers. 

We will see why this happens when we consider how negative
numbers are represented.

The C standards define minimum ranges of values that each data type must
be able to represent. 

As shown in Figure 2.10, their ranges are the same or smaller
than the typical implementations shown in Figures 2.8 and 2.9. 

In particular, we see that they require only a symmetric range of positive and negative numbers. 

We also see that data type int could be implemented with 2-byte numbers, 
although this is mostly a throwback to the days of 16-bit machines. 

We also see that size long could be implemented with 4-byte numbers, as is often the case. 

Data type long long was introduced with ISO C99, and it requires at least an 8-byte representation.



```
New to C?
Signed and unsigned numbers in C, C++, and Java
Both C and C++ support signed (the default) and unsigned numbers. Java supports only signed numbers.
```