2.4.6
Floating Point in C

All versions of C provide two different floating-point data types: 
float and double. 

On machines that support IEEE floating point, 

these data types correspond to single- and double-precision floating point. 

In addition, the machines use the round-to-even rounding mode. 

Unfortunately, 
since the C standards do not require the machine to use IEEE floating point, 
there are no standard methods to change the rounding mode 
or to get special values such as −0, +∞, −∞, or NaN.

Most systems provide a combination of include (‘.h’) files and procedure libraries
to provide access to these features, 

but the details vary from one system to an other. 

For example, the GNU compiler gcc defines program constants INFINITY
(for +∞) and NAN (for NaN) when the following sequence occurs in the program file:
```c 
#define _GNU_SOURCE 1
#include <math.h>
```

More recent versions of C, including ISO C99, 
include a third floating-point data type, long double. 

For many machines and compilers, this data type is equivalent to the double data type. 

For Intel-compatible machines, however, 
gcc implements this data type using an 80-bit “extended precision” format, 
providing a much larger range and precision than does the standard 64-bit format. 


```
Aside
Ariane 5: the high cost of floating-point overflow
Converting large floating-point numbers to integers is a common source of programming errors. 

Such an error had disastrous consequences for the maiden voyage of the Ariane 5 rocket, 
on June 4, 1996. 

Just 37 seconds after liftoff, 
the rocket veered off its flight path, broke up, and exploded. 

Communication satellites valued at $500 million were on board the rocket.

A later investigation [69, 39] showed that the computer controlling 
the inertial navigation system had sent invalid data to the computer controlling 
the engine nozzles. 

Instead of sending flight control information, 
it had sent a diagnostic bit pattern indicating that 
an overflow had occurred during the conversion of a 64-bit floating-point number to a 16-bit signed integer.

The value that overflowed measured the horizontal velocity of the rocket, 

which could be more than 5 times higher than that achieved by the earlier Ariane 4 rocket. 

In the design of the Ariane 4 software, 
they had carefully analyzed the numeric values and determined that 
the horizontal velocity would never overflow a 16-bit number. 

Unfortunately, they simply reused this part of the software in
the Ariane 5 without checking the assumptions on which it had been based.

`








































``
