2.4
Floating Point

A floating-point representation encodes rational numbers of the form V = x × 2 y .

It is useful for performing computations involving very large numbers,
numbers very close to 0 , and more generally as an approximation to real arithmetic.

Up until the 1980s, every computer manufacturer devised its own conventions 
for how floating-point numbers were represented and the details of the operations performed on them. 

In addition, they often did not worry too much about the accuracy of the operations, 

viewing speed and ease of implementation as being more critical than numerical precision.

All of this changed around 1985 with the advent of IEEE Standard 754, 

a carefully crafted standard for representing floating-point numbers and the operations performed on them. 

This effort started in 1976 under Intel’s sponsorship with the design of the 8087, 

a chip that provided floating-point support for the 8086 processor. 

They hired William Kahan, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, 

as a consultant to help design a floating-point standard for its future processors. 

They allowed Kahan to join forces with a committee generating an industry-wide standard 
under the auspices of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). 

The committee ultimately adopted a standard close to the one Kahan had devised for Intel. 

Nowadays, virtually all computers support what has become known as IEEE floating point. 

This has greatly improved the
portability of scientific application programs across different machines.
```
Aside
The IEEE
The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE—pronounced “Eye-Triple-Eee”) is a pro-
fessional society that encompasses all of electronic and computer technology. It publishes journals,
sponsors conferences, and sets up committees to define standards on topics ranging from power trans-
mission to software engineering.

```

In this section, we will see how numbers are represented in the IEEE floating-point format. 

We will also explore issues of rounding, when a number cannot be represented exactly in the format 

and hence must be adjusted upward or downward. 

We will then explore the mathematical properties of addition, multiplication, and relational operators. 

Many programmers consider floating point to be at best uninteresting and at worst arcane and incomprehensible. 

We will see that since the IEEE format is based on a small and consistent set of principles, 

it is really quite elegant and understandable.


